Settlement in Christmas Island, Australia Flying Fish Cove Australia Panoramic Flying Fish Cove Coordinates 10°25′34″S 105°40′22″E﻿ / ﻿10.42611°S 105.67278°E﻿ / -10.42611; 105.67278 Population 1,355 (2021 census)[1] Established 1888 Postcode(s) 6798 LGA(s) Shire of Christmas Island Federal division(s) Lingiari Flying Fish Cove Simplified Chinese 飞鱼湾 Traditional Chinese 飛魚灣 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Fēiyú Wān Yue: Cantonese Jyutping Fei1jyu4*2 Waan1 Malay name Malay Pantai Ikan Terbang[citation needed] Map of Christmas Island showing the location of Flying Fish Cove Flying Fish Cove (Chinese: 飛魚灣, Malay: Pantai Ikan Terbang) is the capital city and main settlement of Christmas Island. Although it was originally named after the British survey-ship Flying-Fish, many maps simply label it "The Settlement".[2] It was the first British settlement on the island, established in 1888. Flying Fish Cove About a third of the territory's total population of 1,600 lives in Flying Fish Cove, which lies near the north-eastern tip of the island. There is a small harbour which serves tourists with yachts. It is possible to carry out recreational diving at the settlement's beach.[3] The settlement contains 3 villages apart from itself - Drumsite, Silver City and Poon Saan which are commonly listed as separate locations. Heritage [edit] The settlement is listed on the Australian Commonwealth Heritage List, citing the following aspects of significance:[4] The buildings that make up the residential precinct are of architectural significance, relatively intact and display considerable unity in a style derived from the British experience in Singapore/Malaya. This unity combines with consistent garden planting and ornamentation and the linear nexus of Gaze Road to create a strong streetscape. The presence of semi-detached servants' quarters are also of historic importance and are indicative of the social and economic stratification which prevailed on the island during the colonial period. The residential area is also historically significant as a reminder of the phase of Christmas Island history when the island came under the control of the British Phosphate Commission and the mining industry and the supporting community, underwent substantial expansion. The Services precinct is of social and historic significance. It includes a number of early Chinese terraced houses as well as a range of structures representing each of the various phases of phosphate mining, including one of the oldest structures on the Island. It was also the Island's main meeting place where Asian workers and European staff came together through a common reliance on retail, health, recreational and other services. The precinct contains a number of buildings of special significance to the community and, along with the three cemeteries, strongly reflects the mixed racial origins of the Island.[4] The historic Malay Kampong precinct within the town, the Industrial and Administrative Group precinct overlooking the town and the Administrator's House 1.5 km east of the town are also listed on the Commonwealth Heritage List.[5][6][7] References [edit] ^ Australian Bureau of Statistics (28 June 2022). "Flying Fish Cove (Urban Centres and Localities)". 2021 Census QuickStats. Retrieved 29 December 2021. ^ Christmas Island settlement [electronic resource] / produced by the Royal Australian Survey Corps under the direction of the Chief of the General Staff. Ed. 2-AAS. Canberra : Royal Australian Survey Corps, 1983. Scale 1:10 000 transverse Mercator proj. "Series R911" ^ Western Mail (Perth, WA : 1885 - 1954). 19 January 1917. See page 24, article and photo ^ a b "Settlement Christmas Island (Place ID 105315)". Australian Heritage Database. Australian Government. Retrieved 15 May 2019. ^ "Industrial and Administrative Group (Place ID 105246)". Australian Heritage Database. Australian Government. Retrieved 15 May 2019. ^ "Administrators House Precinct (Place ID 105337)". Australian Heritage Database. Australian Government. Retrieved 15 May 2019. ^ "Malay Kampong Group (Place ID 105402)". Australian Heritage Database. Australian Government. Retrieved 15 May 2019. Further reading [edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Flying Fish Cove. Golder Associates.(1995) Landslide risk assessment, Flying Fish Cove, Christmas Island, Indian Ocean : submitted to Australian Construction Services. Leederville, W.A. : Golder Associates. "October 1995" v t e Capital cities of Australia National and ACT Canberra NSW Sydney NT Darwin QLD Brisbane SA Adelaide TAS Hobart VIC Melbourne WA Perth List of cities in Australia v t e Capitals of Asia Dependent territories and states with limited recognition are in italics Central Asia South Asia Southeast Asia West Asia Ashgabat, Turkmenistan Astana, Kazakhstan Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan Dushanbe, Tajikistan Tashkent, Uzbekistan East Asia Beijing, China Pyongyang, North Korea Seoul, South Korea Taipei, Taiwan Tokyo, Japan Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia North Asia Moscow, Russia Camp Thunder Cove, BIOT (UK) * Dhaka, Bangladesh Islamabad, Pakistan Kabul, Afghanistan Kathmandu, Nepal Malé, Maldives New Delhi, India Sri Jayawardenepura Kotte, Sri Lanka Thimphu, Bhutan Bandar Seri Begawan, Brunei Bangkok, Thailand Dili, East Timor Flying Fish Cove, Christmas Island (Australia) Hanoi, Vietnam Jakarta, Indonesia Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia Manila, Philippines Naypyidaw, Myanmar Phnom Penh, Cambodia Singapore Vientiane, Laos West Island, Cocos (Keeling) Islands (Australia) Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates Amman, Jordan Ankara, Turkey Baghdad, Iraq Baku, Azerbaijan Beirut, Lebanon Damascus, Syria Doha, Qatar Episkopi Cantonment, Akrotiri and Dhekelia (UK) Jerusalem, Israel * Kuwait City, Kuwait Manama, Bahrain Muscat, Oman Nicosia, Cyprus North Nicosia, Northern Cyprus * Ramallah, Palestine (de facto) * Riyadh, Saudi Arabia Sanaa, Yemen Sokhumi, Abkhazia * Tbilisi, Georgia Tehran, Iran Tskhinvali, South Ossetia * Yerevan, Armenia * Disputed. See: Chagos Archipelago sovereignty dispute, Cyprus dispute, Status of Jerusalem, Abkhaz-Georgian conflict and Georgian-Ossetian conflict Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Flying_Fish_Cove&oldid=1274394428"