This article is about the capital of the country. For the city in California, see San Marino, California. For other uses, see City of San Marino (disambiguation). This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources: "City of San Marino" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (May 2008) (Learn how and when to remove this message) Capital city and castello in San Marino City of San Marino Città di San Marino (Italian) Capital city and castello Clockwise from top: view of Monte Titano, the aerial cable car, San Marino Cathedral, Via Basilicus, panorama from the top, De La Fratta Tower, Guaita Tower, Palazzo Pubblico Flag Coat of arms San Marino's location in San Marino City of San Marino Show map of San Marino City of San Marino Show map of Europe Coordinates: 43°56′4.56″N 12°26′50.28″E﻿ / ﻿43.9346000°N 12.4473000°E﻿ / 43.9346000; 12.4473000 Country San Marino Foundation 3 September 301 (traditional date) Curazie List Cà Berlone, Canepa, Casole, Castellaro, Montalbo, Murata, Santa Mustiola Government • Capitano Alberto Simoncini (Uniamo San Marino; since 2024) Area • Total 7.09 km2 (2.74 sq mi) Elevation 749 m (2,457 ft) Population (January 2022) • Total 4,061[1] • Density 582.23/km2 (1,508.0/sq mi) Time zone UTC+1 (CET) • Summer (DST) UTC+2 (CEST) Postal code RSM-47890 Climate Cfb Website https://www.gov.sm/pub1/GovSM/Istituzioni-e-Forze/Giunte-di-Castello/Castello-di-San-Marino-Citta.html UNESCO World Heritage Site San Marino Historic Centre and Mount Titano UNESCO World Heritage Site Monte Titano and three fortresses on top of it can be seen from many kilometers away Criteria Cultural: iii Reference 1245 Inscription 2008 (32nd Session) Area 55 ha Buffer zone 167 ha The City of San Marino (Italian: Città di San Marino), also known simply as San Marino and locally as Città, is the capital city of the Republic of San Marino and one of its nine castelli. It has a population of 4,061.[1] It is on the western slopes of San Marino's highest point, Monte Titano. It is also the fifth-least-populated national capital in the world. Geography [edit] The City of San Marino borders the castelli of Acquaviva, Borgo Maggiore, Fiorentino, and Chiesanuova and the Italian municipality of San Leo. The City of San Marino contains seven curazie: Cà Berlone, Canepa, Casole, Castellaro, Montalbo, Murata, and Santa Mustiola.[2][3] The International Academy of Sciences San Marino was centered here. History [edit] See also: History of San Marino The city is claimed to be founded by Saint Marinus and several Christian refugees fleeing from Roman persecution in the year 301. The urban heart of the city was protected by three towers: the first, Guaita, built in the 11th century, held a reputation for being impenetrable which to a great extent discouraged attacks. Tensions with bordering powers urged the necessity to build a second tower, Cesta (13th century). The defensive system was not completed until the construction of a third tower, the Montale (14th century) - the smallest of all and constructed on the last of the summits of Monte Titano. With the population of the city increasing, the territory of the country was extended by a few square kilometers. Since the Sammarinese policy was not to invade or to use war to obtain new territories, it was by means of purchases and treaties that San Marino obtained the other eight castelli which make up the country. Economy [edit] Main article: Economy of San Marino The economy of the city of San Marino has always been closely bound to that of the country. Until recently, the main economic activities of the locality were stone extraction and carving. Today, there is a more varied economy, including tourism, commerce, sale of postage stamps, and a small agricultural industry, although the latter is in decline. Landmarks [edit] Map of the municipality of San Marino Main article: Tourism in San Marino The city is visited by more than three million people per year, and has developed progressively as a tourist centre. Of the tourists, 85% are Italian. There are also more than a thousand retail outlets, where one can find a great variety of products. Main sights [edit] Basilica di San Marino Palazzo dei Capitani Palazzo Pubblico Teatro Titano The Three Towers of San Marino Piazza del Titano Piazza Garibaldi Monastery of Santa Clara Grand Hotel San Marino Transport [edit] Main article: Transport in San Marino The city is known for its long, winding cobblestoned streets, as its altitude and steep approach put it beyond the reach of the San Marino Highway. San Marino is also notable in that cars are prohibited in much of the city center. A series of lifts connects the upper part of city with the lower. City of San Marino is the top terminus of the Funivia di San Marino, an aerial cablecar system that connects the city to Borgo Maggiore.[4] Running every fifteen minutes, the two-minute ride is renowned for its panoramic views over San Marino, the Province of Rimini, and the Adriatic Sea.[4][5] The City of San Marino terminus is located at the turn of Contrada Omagnano with Contrada del Pianello, at the historic city centre's northern end, next to the Tourism Secretariat [it] and less than 200 metres (660 feet) from the Basilica of San Marino and the Piazza della Libertà.[6] The City of San Marino is the terminus of seven of San Marino's eight bus lines, which run to other settlements in the country.[7] Additionally, the central bus stop in Piazzale Marino Calcigni is the terminus of a regular coach connection to Rimini,[8][6] operated by coach companies Bonelli and Benedettini.[8] Between 1932 and 1944, a 31.5-kilometre (19.6-mile) electrified narrow gauge railway operated between Rimini and the City of San Marino.[9] During the Second World War, the line was bombed and closed,[9][10] after which its tunnels sheltered refugees during the Battles of Rimini and San Marino.[11][12] After the war, the railway was abandoned in favour of the San Marino Highway.[12][13] In 2012, an 800-metre (1⁄2-mile) section was reopened as a heritage railway in the City of San Marino, running between Piazzale della Stazione and near Via Napoleone.[14] The restored section comprises the original railway's final horseshoe turn through the 502-metre (1,647-foot) Montale tunnel.[15][16] Sport [edit] The city of San Marino has three football teams: the S.S. Murata, the S.P. Tre Penne and the San Marino Academy. The city had the Olympic Flame pass through San Marino during the run-up to the 2006 Winter Olympics. International relations [edit] City of San Marino is twinned with: Rab, Croatia (1968) [17] San Leo, Italy (1995) [18] Nanjing, China (2021) [19] Gallery [edit] Palazzo Pubblico, the City Hall Guaita tower Cesta tower Montale tower Via Paul III Statue of Liberty in the square of the City Hall Panoramic view from Murata See also [edit] Carcere dei Cappuccini, the only prison in San Marino References [edit] ^ a b "Resident Population per municipality". Office of Economic Planning, Data Processing and Statistics. Retrieved 2022-02-21. ^ Rattini, Maurizio; Venturini, Gian Carlo; Volpinari, Antonio L. (21 March 1997). "Regolamento per la disciplina della campagna elttorale". Elezioni (in Italian). Archived from the original on 5 August 2009. Retrieved 14 February 2020. ^ "Città di San Marino" [City of San Marino]. San Marino Web (in Italian). Retrieved 9 February 2024. ^ a b "Ropeway – San Marino Cable Car". San Marino Site. 13 October 2014. Retrieved 31 December 2023. ^ "Funivia di San Marino" [San Marino Cablecar System]. Doppelmayr Group (in Italian). Retrieved 31 December 2023. ^ a b "Pianta della Città di San Marino" [Map of the City of San Marino] (PDF). San Marino Site (in Italian). Retrieved 31 December 2023. ^ "Orari autobus di linea" [Bus timetables]. Azienda Autonoma di Stato per i Servizi Pubblici (in Italian). Retrieved 31 December 2023. ^ a b "Bus to San Marino Republic". riminiturismo.it. 17 July 2023. Retrieved 31 December 2023. ^ a b Macina, Chiara (14 September 2015). "Il Trenino Biancazzurro: la breve vita e la fine" [The Blue and White Train: Its short life and end]. Zoomma (in Italian). Retrieved 3 November 2023. ^ Giardi, Davide (28 February 2013). "Breve storia della Ferrovia" [Brief history of the railway]. libertas (in Italian). Retrieved 3 November 2023. ^ Pagammo, Lussi (20 April 2019). "Il glorioso trenino bianco-azzurro riparte dall'elettromotrice 'AB-03' per unire Rimini a San Marino" [The glorious white-blue train restarts from the 'AB-03' electromotive to connect Rimini to San Marino]. Riminiduepuntozero (in Italian). Retrieved 3 November 2023. ^ a b "12 giugno 1932 - Viene inaugurata la ferrovia Rimini - San Marino" [12 June 1932: The Rimini–San Marino railway was opened]. Chiamami Città (in Italian). 12 June 2023. Retrieved 2 November 2023. ^ Giuliani-Balestrino, Maria Clotilde (2005). "La superstrada Rimini-San Marino" [The Rimini-San Marino railway] (PDF). Studi e Ricerche di Geografia (in Italian). 29 (1): 1–4. ^ Scolari, Giancarlo (21 June 2012). "Torna il treno a San Marino" [The train returns to San Marino]. Ferrovie.it (in Italian). Retrieved 3 November 2023. ^ Vilmos, Oszter (12 August 2012). "Kis ország, kis( )vasút" [Small country, small railway]. Indóház Online (in Hungarian). Retrieved 5 November 2023. ^ "Galleria 'Montale': ex-ferrovia Rimini-San Marino" ['Montale' Tunnel: Rimini-San Marino ex-railway]. sdaprogetti.it (in Italian). Retrieved 5 November 2023. ^ "Celebrazioni nel 50° del gemellaggio con Arbe" (in Italian). Retrieved 2024-01-13. ^ "San Leo e Città di San Marino: il gemellaggio compie 20 anni" (in Italian). 28 November 2015. Retrieved 2024-01-13. ^ "gemellaggio nanjing - San Marino" (in Italian). 28 January 2021. Retrieved 2024-01-13. External links [edit] Media related to Città di San Marino at Wikimedia Commons (in Italian) San Marino's page on giuntedicastello.sm v t e Castelli of San Marino Acquaviva Borgo Maggiore Chiesanuova Domagnano Faetano Fiorentino Montegiardino San Marino (city) Serravalle v t e Capitals of European states and territories Capitals of dependent territories and states whose sovereignty is disputed shown in italics. Sovereign states Amsterdam, Netherlands1 Andorra la Vella, Andorra Ankara, Turkey2 Astana, Kazakhstan2 Athens, Greece Baku, Azerbaijan2 Belgrade, Serbia Berlin, Germany Bern, Switzerland Bratislava, Slovakia Brussels, Belgium3 Bucharest, Romania Budapest, Hungary Chișinău, Moldova Copenhagen, Denmark Dublin, Ireland Helsinki, Finland Kyiv, Ukraine Lisbon, Portugal Ljubljana, Slovenia London, United Kingdom Luxembourg, Luxembourg Madrid, Spain Minsk, Belarus Monaco5 Moscow, Russia Nicosia, Cyprus2 Oslo, Norway Paris, France Podgorica, Montenegro Prague, Czech Republic Reykjavík, Iceland Riga, Latvia Rome, Italy San Marino, San Marino Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina Skopje, North Macedonia Sofia, Bulgaria Stockholm, Sweden Tallinn, Estonia Tbilisi, Georgia2 Tirana, Albania Vaduz, Liechtenstein Valletta, Malta Vatican City4 Vienna, Austria Vilnius, Lithuania Warsaw, Poland Yerevan, Armenia2 Zagreb, Croatia States with limited recognition North Nicosia, Northern Cyprus2 Pristina, Kosovo Sokhumi, Abkhazia2 Tiraspol, Transnistria Tskhinvali, South Ossetia2 Dependencies United Kingdom Constituent countries London, England Edinburgh, Scotland Cardiff, Wales Belfast, Northern Ireland Crown Dependencies and Overseas Territories Douglas, Isle of Man Episkopi Cantonment, Akrotiri and Dhekelia Gibraltar, Gibraltar St Helier, Jersey Saint Peter Port, Guernsey Other Longyearbyen, Svalbard (Norway) Tórshavn, Faroe Islands (Denmark) Federal states Austria Bregenz, Vorarlberg Eisenstadt, Burgenland Graz, Styria Innsbruck, Tyrol Klagenfurt, Carinthia Linz, Upper Austria Salzburg, Salzburg Sankt Pölten, Lower Austria Vienna, Vienna Belgium Communities Brussels, Flemish Community and French Community Eupen, German-speaking Community Regions Brussels, Brussels-Capital Region and Flanders Namur, Wallonia Bosnia and Herzegovina Banja Luka (de facto), Republika Srpska Brčko, Brčko District Sarajevo, Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina Germany Berlin, Berlin Bremen, Bremen Dresden, Saxony Düsseldorf, North Rhine-Westphalia Erfurt, Thuringia Hamburg, Hamburg Hanover, Lower Saxony Kiel, Schleswig-Holstein Magdeburg, Saxony-Anhalt Mainz, Rhineland-Palatinate Munich, Bavaria Potsdam, Brandenburg Saarbrücken, Saarland Schwerin, Mecklenburg-Vorpommern Stuttgart, Baden-Württemberg Wiesbaden, Hesse Russia Republics Cheboksary, Chuvashia Cherkessk, Karachay-Cherkessia Elista, Kalmykia Grozny, Chechnya Izhevsk, Udmurtia Kazan, Tatarstan Magas, Ingushetia Makhachkala, Dagestan Maykop, Adygea Nalchik, Kabardino-Balkaria Petrozavodsk, Karelia Saransk, Mordovia Simferopol, Crimea (disputed) Syktyvkar, Komi Ufa, Bashkortostan Vladikavkaz, North Ossetia–Alania Yoshkar-Ola, Mari El Autonomous okrugs Naryan-Mar, Nenets Krais Krasnodar, Krasnodar Krai Perm, Perm Krai Stavropol, Stavropol Krai Oblasts Arkhangelsk, Arkhangelsk Oblast Astrakhan, Astrakhan Oblast Belgorod, Belgorod Oblast Bryansk, Bryansk Oblast Ivanovo, Ivanovo Oblast Kaliningrad, Kaliningrad Oblast Kaluga, Kaluga Oblast Kirov, Kirov Oblast Kostroma, Kostroma Oblast Krasnogorsk and Moscow, Moscow Oblast (de facto) Kursk, Kursk Oblast Lipetsk, Lipetsk Oblast Murmansk, Murmansk Oblast Nizhny Novgorod, Nizhny Novgorod Oblast Orenburg, Orenburg Oblast Oryol, Oryol Oblast Penza, Penza Oblast Pskov, Pskov Oblast Rostov-on-Don, Rostov Oblast Ryazan, Ryazan Oblast Gatchina, Leningrad Oblast Samara, Samara Oblast Saratov, Saratov Oblast Smolensk, Smolensk Oblast Tambov, Tambov Oblast Tula, Tula Oblast Tver, Tver Oblast Ulyanovsk, Ulyanovsk Oblast Veliky Novgorod, Novgorod Oblast Vladimir, Vladimir Oblast Volgograd, Volgograd Oblast Vologda, Vologda Oblast Voronezh, Voronezh Oblast Yaroslavl, Yaroslavl Oblast Federal cities Moscow Saint Petersburg Sevastopol (disputed) Switzerland Aarau, Aargau Altdorf, Uri Appenzell, Appenzell Innerrhoden Basel, Basel-Stadt Bellinzona, Ticino Chur, Grisons Delémont, Jura Frauenfeld, Thurgau Fribourg, Canton of Fribourg Geneva, Canton of Geneva Herisau, Appenzell Ausserrhoden Lausanne, Vaud Liestal, Basel-Landschaft Lucerne, Canton of Lucerne Neuchâtel, Canton of Neuchâtel Sarnen, Obwalden Schaffhausen, Canton of Schaffhausen Schwyz, Canton of Schwyz Sion, Valais Solothurn, Canton of Solothurn Stans, Nidwalden St. Gallen, Canton of St. Gallen Glarus, Canton of Glarus Zug, Canton of Zug Zurich, Canton of Zürich Autonomous entities Italy Autonomous regions Cagliari, Sardinia Palermo, Sicily Trento, Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol Aosta, Aosta Valley Trieste, Friuli Venezia Giulia Portugal Autonomous regions Ponta Delgada, Angra do Heroísmo, & Horta, Azores Funchal, Madeira Spain Barcelona, Catalonia Las Palmas & Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Canary Islands Logroño, La Rioja Madrid, Community of Madrid Mérida, Extremadura Murcia, Region of Murcia Oviedo, Asturias Palma de Mallorca, Balearic Islands Pamplona, Navarre Santander, Cantabria Santiago de Compostela, Galicia Seville, Andalusia Toledo, Castilla–La Mancha (de facto) Valencia, Valencian Community Valladolid, Castile and León (de facto) Vitoria-Gasteiz, Basque Country (de facto) Zaragoza, Aragon Other Ajaccio, Corsica Collectivité (France) Batumi, Adjara (Georgia) Comrat, Gagauzia (Moldova) Karyes, Mount Athos (Greece) Mariehamn, Åland Islands (Finland) Nakhchivan, Nakhchivan (Azerbaijan) Novi Sad, Vojvodina (Serbia) Simferopol, Crimea (Ukraine) 1 Also the capital of the Kingdom of the Netherlands 2 Continental placement may vary depending on geographic convention being followed 3 Also the seat of the European Union, see Institutional seats of the European Union and Brussels and the European Union 4 A city-state Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Geographic MusicBrainz area Other NARA 43°56′4.56″N 12°26′50.28″E﻿ / ﻿43.9346000°N 12.4473000°E﻿ / 43.9346000; 12.4473000 Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=City_of_San_Marino&oldid=1274853462"